So we saw that we can use a return statement to export or return a value so that we can capture it later
in a variable or do something with it.
But there's another thing you should know about return statements which is that they end function execution.
So if you have a return statement in the middle of your function the code afterwards is not going to
execute.
For example if we have our function Square which takes a number and we want it to return x times x if
that's the parameter.
If I add some code afterwards like console that log all done and I try calling this function square
of four I get 16 but this console that log never runs it's after this return statement.
Whenever javascript encounters a return it just moves on.
It's done with this function entirely.
We can have 100 lines after this they would not run.
But of course if we were using conditionals IF WE HAD TO IF statement around a return then it may not
run every single time.
So it's not a matter of if there is a return statement written anywhere in the function nothing afterwards
runs.
It's only if the return statement is executed.
If this code is run which in our case it always is.
But we could write something else like a very stupid function called is purple is purple takes a color
as a parameter and we'll assume it to string and if color is triple equal to the string purple we will
return true.
I name this is purple which is a standard convention is something for a boolean method which returns
True or false.
So we have true or false or returning true if color is triple equal to purple.
If it's not equal to purple we could return false.
So we have to return statements but only one of them is going to run if color is purple.
This will run and let's actually make it a little more case insensitive.
So why don't we to lower case color.
So if someone passes in purple in all caps we'll compare it first by lower casing it to all lowercase
and then comparing it to purple.
All right.
So is purple of Blue is false is purple of purple.
It's true.
Ups.
All caps.
We still get true.
So this is not the best way of writing this function and we'll talk about how we could refactor it in
a moment.
Ignoring the fact that it's not even a useful function at all.
Not even remotely useful.
We do have to return statements only one of them is going to run but as soon as one of them does run
the rest of the code stops.
So in this if if I had a console that log.
Yay.
That's never going to run ever.
There is no scenario where this runs because either this is true and we're returning which stops the
execution of the function completely or it's false.
And so this entire chunk is skipped and removed right to here.
If I try is purple with purple we don't get it.
OK so I mentioned there are other ways of writing this for especially for a simple if else a simple
yes or no.
We can rewrite this function a couple of different ways and when I copy this the first improvement we
can make is to remove the else entirely because of the way return statements work.
What we just talked about where they end function execution the only way to get to this line is if this
is false because we're returning true in here execution stops.
So if color is purple we're done.
Function over.
If it's not this is the only way we would ever return false.
So it's just a shorter way of writing this.
You'll see people write functions like this that take advantage of the fact that a return statement
stops a function.
OK so this is one way of doing it.
We can just run the code again make sure it still works is purple of purple is true is purple of anything
else is false.
We don't have an else now there's actually an even shorter way of writing this where we could basically
do it on one line.
If we're just returning a Boolean true or false we can simply return this right here return color dot
to lowercase triple equals purple.
This right here is a boolean expression.
Triple equals will give us true or false.
So if I have let's say color is pink I would call Pink Dot to lowercase
triple equals purple.
That's false but if color is purple even if it's capitalized oddly it still gives us true.
So we're going to return this value and that will be true or false.
This evaluates first.
Then it's returned so it's just another way of writing it.
We only need one return.
Now this only works for a yes or no.
Simple situation like we have here.
What if we wanted to check if color is purple.
We want to return true.
And if color is like we want to return true.
Anything else is false.
We would need to rewrite this.
It would be harder to do in a single line.
And let's do one more example.
I want to show how a return will stop a function no matter where it's located in that function.
So it could be instead of a loop instead of a conditional.
It doesn't matter so we'll do a slightly more advanced version of is purple.
Let's go with contains purple and this will accept an array and we will loop over the array and if any
element in that array is either purple or magenta we'll return true.
Otherwise we return false.
So we'll loop over the array for let's color of array we'll use it for of if color is triple equal purple
or color is triple equal said magenta.
I think this magenta purple or is it pink for our purposes for considering it purple.
If that's the case we'll return true.
And then where would we return false.
This one's a bit different if we put return false here or else return false.
Then as soon as we encounter something that's not purple let's say our array looks like this blue pink
magenta.
The first time through the loop color will be blue.
So this is not true and we don't want to return false right away.
That stops the function entirely.
We're only checking the first element.
The only time we know that the entire array does not contain purple is if the loop is finished.
So if the loop is done and we haven't returned true that means we never found purple or magenta as an
element.
Then we can return false.
So we just move it down there.
So let's test it out contains Purple.
I'll paste that array in.
I do need to make sure I get rid of the semicolon add my parents and we get true if we change this to
no longer be magenta.
We get false so this is showing us two things.
First of all when we return true it doesn't matter that we're instead of a conditional instead of a
loop instead of a function.
The function is done at least this single execution of it when we called it with this array.
It's done.
It returns true so it's not like a return is only going to break out of one code block.
It has the power to halt the entire function even though it's in a conditional in a loop.
So this loop might run one time if the first element is purple or magenta or it might run 100 times.
If our elements or if our array is one hundred items long with no instance of purple or magenta and
the second thing we saw once again is returning false or returning some value as a last ditch has basically
the last option.
The last line in this function.
So if none of this return true at any point that means we've gone through the entire loop then just
return false.
We don't have to add additional logic.
We don't need an.
Else we just know.
If you haven't returned by now.
This is what we want to return.
So if this is true the function is done and this never runs.
If we never return true then this runs.
OK so we've seen the basics of functions at this point.
We define a function at least one version.
All we've seen is the function syntax function statement or function declaration.
We have function.
Some function name potentially different parameters.
We would add in a and b and then some return value.
And you don't have to return a value from every single function.
But a lot of the time you want to and we'll see a bunch of examples coming up because it's time to get
some practice.